[DOCS] Adds anomaly detection alert documentation (#68923)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/ml/anomaly-detection/ml-configuring-alerts.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[ml-configuring-alerts]]
= Configuring {anomaly-detect} alerts

{anomaly-detect-cap} alerts run scheduled checks on an {anomaly-job} or a group 
of jobs to detect anomalies with certain conditions. If an anomaly meets the 
conditions, the alert triggers the defined action. For example, you can create 
an alert that checks an {anomaly-job} every fifteen minutes for critical 
anomalies and notifies you in an email. This page helps you to configure an 
{anomaly-detect} alert. To learn more about alerts in the {stack}, refer to 
{kibana-ref}/alerting-getting-started.html#alerting-getting-started[Alerting and Actions].

[[creating-anomaly-alerts]]
== Creating an alert

You can create {anomaly-detect} alerts in the {anomaly-job} wizard after you 

> started the job, from the job list or under **{stack-manage-app} > 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start the job, from the job list, or under **{stack-manage-app} > 
```

{alerts-ui}**. On the *Create alert* window, select *{anomaly-detect-cap} alert* 
under the {ml-cap} section, then give a name to the alert and optionally provide 
tags.

Specify the time interval for the alert to check detected anomalies. It is 
recommended to select an interval that is close to the bucket span of the 
associated job. You can also select a notification option by using the _Notify_ 
selector. For more details, refer to the documentation of

> {kib-ref}/defining-alerts.html#defining-alerts-general-details[general alert details].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kibana-ref}/defining-alerts.html#defining-alerts-general-details[general alert details].
```

NOTE: {anomaly-detect-cap} alerts handle duplications. If you set an interval 
that makes the alert check the same bucket multiple times and the bucket 

> contains an anomaly that meets the alert conditions, then the configured action 

Reviewer: Not mandatory, but I think "then" is unnecessary in cases like this.
```suggestion
contains an anomaly that meets the alert conditions, the configured action 
```

* Notify every time alert is active: actions are triggered every time when the 
  alert checks changes.
* Notify on a custom action interval: actions run by using an interval that you 
  configured.
  
Select the {anomaly-job} or the group of {anomaly-jobs} that is checked by the 
alert. In case you select a group, the {anomaly-detect} alert handles possible 
duplications in the results, hence they don't trigger the configured actions 

> unnecessarily. If you assign additional jobs to the group, the alert 

Reviewer 2: I find this sentence a bit misleading. The point is that in case the selected job/groups have some common jobs, the alert execution will extract unique ids to check the alert condition. But I presume it's expected behavior, not entirely sure it's worth mentioning 🤔

automatically checks the new jobs the next time when it runs.

> You can select the result type of the {anomaly-job} that the alert checks. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe
```suggestion
You can select the result type of the {anomaly-job} that triggers the alert. 
```
For instance, when the user selected the `bucket` result type, the alert executor will also query for anomalous records and influencers within this time range (2x of the maximum bucket span) and will include them into the alert instance, but the actual trigger happens based on the selected result type and associated score.

{anomaly-detect-cap} produces three types of results: bucket, record, and 
influencer. Bucket result type is selected by default.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-severity.jpg["Selecting result type, severity, and test interval"]

> For each alert, you can configure which severity level triggers it. The severity 

Reviewer 2: The user provides an actual number, so not sure if we should mention `level` here

threshold is based on the `anomaly_score` which indicates the significance of a 
given anomaly compared to previous anomalies. The default severity level is 
critical (anomalies with an `anomaly_score` 75 or higher).

You can also test the configured conditions and check the sample results by 

> providing a valid interval in the pertinent field.

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning that the preview provides the number of potentially created alert instances during the selected relative time range.

[[defining-actions]]
== Defining actions

As a next step, connect your alert to actions that use supported built-in 
integrations. Actions are {kib} services or third-party integrations that run 
when the alert conditions are met.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-actions.jpg["Selecting action type"]

For example, you can choose _Slack_ as an action type and configure it to send a 
message to a channel you selected. You can also create an index connector that 
writes the JSON object you configure to a specific index. It's also possible to 
customize the notification messages. A list of variables is available to include 
in the message, like job ID, anomaly score, time, or top influencers.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-messages.jpg["Customizing your message"]

> After you saved the configurations, the alert appears in the _Alerts and 

Reviewer: Or "have saved"..., but I like "save" better.
```suggestion
After you save the configurations, the alert appears in the _Alerts and 
```

> Actions_ list where you can check its status and the overview of its 

Reviewer: I think another verb is needed here. For example:
```suggestion
Actions_ list where you can check its status and see the overview of its 
```

[role="xpack"]
[[ml-configuring-alerts]]
= Configuring {anomaly-detect} alerts

{anomaly-detect-cap} alerts run scheduled checks on an {anomaly-job} or a group 

> of jobs to detect anomalies with certain conditions. If an {anomaly} meets the 

Reviewer: There's no shared attribute in https://github.com/elastic/docs/blob/master/shared/attributes.asciidoc that matches this:
```suggestion
of jobs to detect anomalies with certain conditions. If an anomaly meets the 
```

conditions, the alert triggers the defined action. For example, you can create 

> an alert that checks an {anomaly-job} in every fifteen minutes for critical 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an alert that checks an {anomaly-job} every fifteen minutes for critical 
```

> anomalies and notify you in an email. This page helps you to configure an 

Reviewer: I think this needs to match "checks" from earlier in the sentence:
```suggestion
anomalies and notifies you in an email. This page helps you to configure an 
```

{anomaly-detect} alert. To learn more about alerts in the {stack}, refer to 
{kibana-ref}/alerting-getting-started.html#alerting-getting-started[Alerting and Actions].

[[creating-anomaly-alerts]]
== Creating an alert

> {anomaly-detect-cap} alerts can be created in the {anomaly-job} wizard, from the 

Reviewer: Not mandatory, but I like more active "you can..." instead of passive "...can be...":
```suggestion
You can create {anomaly-detect} alerts in the {anomaly-job} wizard, from the 
```

> job list or under **Stack management > Alerts and Actions**. On the *Create 

Reviewer: There are attributes for these labels, since they've been renamed at least once:
```suggestion
job list or under **{stack-manage-app} > {alerts-ui}**. On the *Create 
```

> alert* template, select *{anomaly-detect-cap} alert* under the {ml-cap} section, 

Reviewer: Is "template" the right word?  I would have thought "page" or "window", so it might be worthwhile to follow up with a Kibana writer.
> alert* template, select *{anomaly-detect-cap} alert* under the {ml-cap} section,

then give a name to the alert and optionally provide tags.

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-type.jpg["Creating an anomaly detection alert"]

Reviewer: > image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-type.jpg["Creating an anomaly detection alert"]

This picture seems to be highlighting the "Notify" options, which haven't been mentioned yet.  I'd recommend either moving this screenshot til later or changing it to one that isn't highlighting something you haven't talked about yet.

> Specify the time interval for the alert to check detected anomalies. It is 

Reviewer: > Specify the time interval for the alert to check detected anomalies. 

There are some comments in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/master/defining-alerts.html#defining-alerts-general-details that might be worth mentioning here too (or linking to that page instead). e.g. related to production considerations.

> recommended to select an interval that is similar to the bucket span of the 

Reviewer: > recommended to select an interval that is similar to the bucket span of the 

What is meant by similar?  A multiple of the bucket span?  Or just a value that's close to the bucket span value? Can we be more specific?

associated job. You can also select a notification option by using the _Notify_ 

> selector. There are three notification options:

Reviewer: > There are three notification options:

This also seems to be standard behaviour for all alerts. Is it worthwhile defining them here?  If we put these definitions in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/master/defining-alerts.html#defining-alerts-general-details instead, perhaps we don't need to restate them here?

Author: I remove these options from here and add them to the defining alerts page in a separate PR.

* Notify only on status change: actions are triggered when the alert status 
  changes.
* Notify every time alert is active: actions are triggered every time when the 
  alert checks changes.
* Notify on a custom action interval: actions run by using an interval that you 
  configured.
  
Select the {anomaly-job} or the group of {anomaly-jobs} that is checked by the 
alert. If you assign additional jobs to the group, the alert automatically 

> checks the new jobs the next time when it runs.

Reviewer: > checks the new jobs the next time when it runs.

It's unclear to me what "it" is: the alert? the job? If it's the job, what if it's already started? Do you have to stop and restart it?

You can select the result type of the {anomaly-job} that triggers the alert. 

> {anomaly-detect-cap} produces three types of results: bucket, record, and 

Reviewer: IMO it's more appropriate to say the jobs produce these results:
```suggestion
{anomaly-jobs-cap} produces three types of results: bucket, record, and 
```

> influencer. Bucket result type is selected by default.

Reviewer: If you accept my suggestion on the first half of the sentence, then this should change too. I also think the default selection detail is unnecessary:
```suggestion
influencer results.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-severity.jpg["Selecting result type, severity, and test interval"]

> For each alert, you can configure the `anomaly_score` that triggers it. The 

Reviewer: > `anomaly_score`....

At the moment I think the only place in the docs we cover anomaly scores in detail is in the callout box in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/machine-learning/master/ml-gs-results.html. In the long run, hopefully we can have that information in the core "anomaly detection" page and link to it there.

Author: I added it to my backlog. Thanks!

`anomaly_score` indicates the significance of a given anomaly compared to 
previous anomalies. The default severity threshold is 75 which means every 
anomaly with an `anomaly_score` of 75 or higher triggers the alert.

> You can also test the configured conditions and check the sample results by 

Reviewer: It was unclear to me until I examined the screenshot whether this test was against existing data or making guesses into the future.  If indeed it's the former, maybe we can make that clearer? For example:

> You can also test the configured conditions against your existing data set and check the sample results by providing a valid interval for your data.

providing a valid interval in the pertinent field. The generated preview 
contains the number of potentially created alert instances during the relative 

> time range you defined.

Reviewer: > potentially created alert instances...

If you're filling in this data against a job as part of the job creation wizard (i.e. the job has never started yet), is this option still available?  Does that mean you have to wait while it starts the job and generates these scores?

Author: I made it clearer in the **Creating an alert** section that you need to start a job to create an alert for it. Even if you don't have any anomalies in the interval you selected, the option is still available and the test shows that the alert was triggered 0 times in the interval.

> NOTE: {anomaly-detect-cap} alert handles duplications. If you set an interval 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: {anomaly-detect-cap} alerts handle duplications. If you set an interval 
```

> that makes the alert to check the same bucket multiple times and the bucket 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that makes the alert check the same bucket multiple times and the bucket 
```

contains an anomaly that meets the alert conditions, then the configured action 

> is triggered only once.

Reviewer: > ... is triggered only once.

Does this information apply to the "Check the alert condition with an interval" interval?  Or to the "Check every" interval?  It seems to me the former is just a one-time check so this information should be mentioned at the stage where we're talking about the latter more important field.

[[defining-actions]]
== Defining actions

As a next step, connect your alert to actions that use supported built-in 
integrations. Actions are {kib} services or third-party integrations that run 
when the alert conditions are met.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ml-anomaly-alert-actions.jpg["Selecting action type"]

For example, you can choose _Slack_ as an action type and configure it to send a 

> message to a channel you selected or you can also create an index connector that 

Reviewer: The "or" and "also" seem contradictory here. Which is correct?

> message to a channel you selected or you can also create an index connector that
